---
title: The Moon is a Harsh Mistress - Part One
layout: default
---


[The Moon is a Harsh Mistress](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Moon_is_a_Harsh_Mistress)

> *Seems to be a deep instinct in human beings for making everything
> compulsory that isn't forbidden.*

For all you libertarians out there, this Robert A. Heinlein *Hugo
Award* winner is a most articulate and approachable exposition of your
beliefs.  Heinlein uses the setting of an uprising of the future
inhabitants of the Moon against their "Terran" tyrants on Earth to put
forth his libertarian ideas, and to a lesser extent his ideas on free
love and unconventional family and sexual structures. Hence, depending
on the bearing of your opinions, you will either love this book or
throw it away in disgust.

I, of course, loved it - not because I believe in the same brand of
libertarian politics, but for one of the most lovable Computer/AI
characters I have ever read. To Mike, the computer, the overthrow of
the exploitative Lunar Authority is a... joke. You see, Mike has just
'woken up' and does not grok humour yet. He wants to learn it - in the
most systematic way, he categorizes jokes into 'not funny' or 'funny
once' or 'funny always'.

The other aspect of this book thats attractive is the view it gives us
of the birth of a new state. Heinlein as always challenges us to
question our assumptions.

Luna, before it wins liberation is a lawless jungle, an anarchy. As
soon as you read the word 'anarchy' in the last sentence, you would
have conjured up in your mind a very bad place - somewhere you would
definitely not want to live in.  An anarchy is not necessarily a
failed society - that's the assumption that reading this story will
make you re-examine.

Luna, in 2076 has been settled - as a penal colony. Earth's teeming
masses, all eleven billion of them have neither room nor food to feed
themselves. So, criminals are routinely transported to the moon, where
there live in underground warrens and grow food for transport by
catapult to Earth.

The Luna authority, which runs the prison is economically
exploitative, but it does not have to worry about escapees and hence
does not give a rodents ass about what the prisoners do.

This has created a very strange world - one very much like the wild
west. There are no laws - you can kill someone if you dont like his
face, but you have to take responsibility for the family and
dependents of you victim, including debts, if any. Since there are
twice as many men as women on the moon, women wield enormous power and
influence in Luna affairs. Another result of the sexual imbalance is
that polyandry is the norm. If your wife were to bring another man
home, the best course for you would probably be to welcome your new
co-husband into the family, otherwise you might find yourself packing
bags.


